Configure Router Interfaces
At this point, your routers have their basic configurations. The next step is to configure their interfaces. This is because routers are not reachable by end devices until the interfaces are configured. There are many different types of interfaces available on Cisco routers. For example, the Cisco ISR 4321 router is equipped with two Gigabit Ethernet interfaces:
GigabitEthernet 0/0/0 (G0/0/0)
GigabitEthernet 0/0/1 (G0/0/1)
The task to configure a router interface is very similar to a management SVI on a switch. Specifically, it includes issuing the following commands:
Router(config)# interface type-and-number
Router(config-if)# description description-text
Router(config-if)# ip address ipv4-address subnet-mask
Router(config-if)# ipv6 address ipv6-address/prefix-length
Router(config-if)# no shutdown
Note: When a router interface is enabled, information messages should be displayed confirming the enabled link.
Although the description command is not required to enable an interface, it is good practice to use it. It can be helpful in troubleshooting on production networks by providing information about the type of network connected. For example, if the interface connects to an ISP or service carrier, the description command would be helpful to enter the third-party connection and contact information.
Note: The description-text is limited to 240 characters.
Using the no shutdown command activates the interface and is similar to powering on the interface. The interface must also be connected to another device, such as a switch or a router, for the physical layer to be active.
Note: On inter-router connections where there is no Ethernet switch, both interconnecting interfaces must be configured and enabled.
Configure Router Interfaces Example
In this example, the directly connected interfaces of R1 in the topology diagram will be enabled.

To configure the the interfaces on R1, use the following commands.
Note: Notice the informational messages informing us that G0/0/0 and G0/0/1 are enabled.
Verify Interface Configuration
There are several commands that can be used to verify interface configuration. The most useful of these is the show ip interface brief and show ipv6 interface brief commands, as shown in the example.
Configuration Verification Commands
The table summarizes the more popular show commands used to verify interface configuration.
Table caption
Commands Description
show ip interface brief
show ipv6 interface brief
The output displays all interfaces, their IP addresses, and their current status. The configured and connected interfaces should display a Status of “up” and Protocol of “up”. Anything else would indicate a problem with either the configuration or the cabling.
show ip route
show ipv6 route
Displays the contents of the IP routing tables stored in RAM.
show interfaces
Displays statistics for all interfaces on the device. However, this command will only display the IPv4 addressing information.
show ip interfaces
Displays the IPv4 statistics for all interfaces on a router.
show ipv6 interface
Displays the IPv6 statistics for all interfaces on a router.
Click each button to see the command output for each configuration verification command.
show ip interface brief
show ipv6 interface brief
show ip route
show ipv6 route
show interfaces
show ip interface
show ipv6 interface
Syntax Checker - Configure Interfaces
Use this syntax checker to practice configuring the GigabitEthemet 0/0 interface on a router.
Describe the link as 'Link to LAN'.
Configure the IPv4 address as 192.168.10.1 with the subnet mask 255.255.255.0.
Configure the IPv6 address as 2001:db8:acad:10::1 with the /64 prefix length.
Activate the interface.
Enter global configuration mode.
R1#
